<!-- image -->

## SCIENCE AND YOUR EVERYDAY LIFE

A highly contagious and potentially fatal virus spreads through respiratory droplets but is easily preventable through a simple vaccination. Sound familiar? Since you've gone through a pandemic-one of the events in your lifetime that will make history-we know what you're thinking: Covid-19!

But no, the virus we're talking about is canine distemper. This is one of the most serious diseases a dog can get. It can also affect foxes, pandas, skunks, and raccoons. Like rabies, distemper is nothing you or your furry friend want to mess with. It can lead to some gnarly symptoms, including dehydration, vomiting, dif fi cult breathing, and odd fi ts of snapping or chomping. As the condition worsens, infected dogs can suffer grand mal seizures followed by death.

Dog owners fi nd the idea of canine distemper distressing. Most want effective prevention and treatment for their pets and, if they hear of canine distemper, follow expert veterinary advice. What's tragically ironic is that some of the same dog owners who do not hesitate to vaccinate their puppies against distemper are skeptical towards vaccines for humans, discounting the advice of medical experts.

Human papilloma virus (HPV) is widespread worldwide; it is one of the world's most frequently sexually transmitted diseases. Among other effects, HPV substantially increases the risk of various forms of cancer. Thankfully, there's a vaccine for HPV. The vaccine fi rst became available in 2006, after thorough testing for safety and ef fi cacy. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends HPV vaccines as part of routine vaccinations in all countries. And yet, the global HPV vaccination rate in 2018 was estimated to be only 12.2%. This low rate is a combination of limited availability and affordability in low- to middle-income nations and parents' resistance to their children receiving the HPV vaccine, especially in high-income nations.

At some point in their lives, most people will need to decide about whether to be vaccinated for some disease, whether to have their children undergo routine vaccinations, and even whether to have their dog vaccinated. And, when it comes to vaccines for humans, sometimes vaccine skeptics have louder voices than doctors and other experts. So, it can be dif fi cult to get a clear understanding of vaccines' safety, effectiveness, and necessity for public health. What can help is a sound understanding of the medical research about vaccines and a deeper understanding of what makes this and other scienti fi c research trustworthy.

IGURE 0.1 F Routine vaccinations are medically essential for puppies and children

<!-- image -->

All vaccines approved for use in humans or animals have undergone thorough testing for safety and ef  cacy. Most vaccines do have potential side effects, such as achiness fi for a day or two, but serious side effects for any approved vaccine are very rare. And vaccine skeptics' claims about substantive risks of vaccinations have been thoroughly debunked.

But you don't need to just take our word for it, or the word of any individual scientist. Science's credibility and its trustworthiness as a source of knowledge result from its methods and reasoning processes and how these are carried out by scientists and endorsed by scienti  c institutions. This is what makes established scienti  c knowledge fi fi trustworthy. Learning more about these methods and reasoning processes can give you a  sense for why scienti  c research results in trustworthy knowledge, and it can also fi prepare you to evaluate speci  c reports of scienti  c research   ndings. fi fi fi

Understanding how science works is important because scienti  c   ndings, and the fi fi public's reactions to them, dramatically shape our world. Science regularly in  uences fl your life, whether you are looking for it to or not. Consider the Covid-19 pandemic, the internet and the rise of AI, and climate change policy. The ability to understand and assess scienti  c reasoning enables you to make educated decisions related to your fi health, medical care, lifestyle, and more. It also enables you to critically evaluate reports of scienti  c   ndings and the credentials of experts in order to decide not just what to fi fi believe, but-more importantly-why.

Someone with a sophisticated understanding of science is also well positioned to make judgments about science more globally. Is the level of public funding for

scienti  c research suf  cient? Should we worry if private corporations fund science? fi fi Are there important topics that aren't yet adequately targeted in scienti  c research? fi Answers to these questions require thinking about the status of the scienti  c enterfi prise  as  a  whole,  how  it  should  relate  to  society,  and  whether  and  how  funding sources matter. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis

Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

## ECIPES FOR SCIENCE R

Scientists  are,  of  course,  the  main  practitioners  of  science.  Other  researchers  have as their primary focus understanding what science-and scientists-are up to. These researchers investigate what science is and how it works, its challenges and limitations, and its relationship with society. These topics are what this book is all about. Several disciplines investigate science in this way; primary among these are history, sociology, and  philosophy.  Historians  of  science  research  how  science  has  changed  over  time. Sociologists research social and cultural influences on science. This book draws from the  history  and  sociology  of  science,  but  its  main  approach  is  philosophical. This  is because we, its authors, are philosophers of science.

f you haven't studied philosophy of science, it may sound obscure. But I philosophy of science is just the investigation of science, focused especially on questions of what science should be like in order to be a trustworthy route to knowledge and to achieve the other ends we want it to have, such as usefulness to society. This book is written from  a  philosophical  perspective,  but  it  does  not  dwell  on  philosophers'  different theories and debates about science. Instead, we aim to combine insights about science from philosophy with concrete examples to illuminate science's aims, methods, and patterns of reasoning, without getting bogged down in controversies, technical terminology, or too many details.

The title of this book, Recipes for Science is meant to evoke two ideas. First, culinary , recipes have many variations: in what dish they are used to create, which version of the dish, and details of implementation. Different recipes are used to make bread and lasagna, bread recipes may call for leavening with yeast or baking soda, and ingredient measurements may be in weight or volume. Science is also like this. Scienti  c research fi can have many different aims and proceed using a variety of different methods.

On the other hand, any culinary recipe employs intentional combinations of ingredients using time-tested methods to lead to a speci  c outcome. And different recipes fi for one type of food tend to have some elements in common, even if many of their features vary. So, for example, breads usually incorporate grain of some kind as a major ingredient, most use a leavening agent, and they are cooked-usually but not always by baking in the oven. There are resemblances among different breads and the recipes used to make them, even if there's no simple de  nition of bread and no one recipe fi required to make bread. Science is like this as well. Even as it proceeds in different ways, and even as there's no one overarching set of instructions or mechanical procedures that guarantees good science, there are certain generalizations that can be made about how good science is conducted.

IGURE 0.2 F Recipes for bread have many variations, but both the recipes and the resulting breads tend to have some features in common with one another. Scientific methods are like this: endless variation but with themes in both methods and results.

<!-- image -->

This book aims to facilitate a clear understanding of the main elements of science, and the importance of those elements, even as it illustrates the tremendous variety of projects that count as science.

The   rst part of the book,   Chapters 1  -  5  , addresses the nature of science and its fi key methods.   Chapter 1 surveys what is distinctive about science's aims, methods, and institutional structure and suggests those features as a checklist for distinguishing science from non-science and fake science.   Chapter 2 introduces how science is  shaped  by  values,  varies  in  its  aims,  and  consists  in  a  variety  of  recipes  with  a few commonalities.   Chapter 3  examines  the  nature  of  scienti  c  experiments  and fi the roles experimentation plays in science.   Chapter 4 catalogues varieties of nonexperimental  studies  and  discuss  their  advantages  and  disadvantages.    Chapter 5

focuses  on  scienti  c  models:  how  they  are  constructed  and  used,  and  the  main fi varieties in which they come.

The  second  part  of  the  book,    Chapters 6  10  ,  focuses  on  important  patterns  of reasoning in science.   Chapter 6 examines patterns of deductive reasoning and their use in scienti  c hypothesis-testing.   Chapter 7 addresses the importance of and chalfi lenges  with  inductive  reasoning  and  the  scienti  c  signi  cance  of  abductive  reasonfi fi ing,  also  known  as  inference  to  the  best  explanation.    Chapter 8  introduces  basic concepts and interpretations of probabilistic reasoning.   Chapter 9 surveys graphical and  numerical  representation  using  descriptive  statistics  and  misuses  of  statistical reasoning, while   Chapter 10 discusses how inferential statistics is used in estimation and hypothesis-testing. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

The   nal part of the book,   Chapters 11  -  13  , addresses the ultimate aims of science fi and its relationship to society.   Chapter 11 addresses how scienti  c methods are used fi to acquire causal knowledge.   Chapter 12 examines how scienti  c   ndings yield theofi fi retical  knowledge and understanding of the world and discusses change in scienti  c fi theories and how science makes progress. Finally,   Chapter 13 discusses the complicated relationship science bears to society, analyzes how values in  uence science, and surveys fl the changes and challenges facing science in the 21st century.

## NTENDED AUDIENCES AND HOW TO USE THE BOOK I

This book is not just for students of philosophy or science majors. Indeed, the primary audience we had in mind in developing this book is an undergraduate student in a general education course, who may not take any additional science courses in college. We asked ourselves, what would that student most benefit from knowing about how science works? What episodes from historical and current science would that student be interested to read about and contemplate?

We expect this book will also be useful for some more specialized or more advanced courses. These include science education courses, especially those that focus on the nature of science and scienti  c reasoning; introductory philosophy of science courses, fi especially  if  supplemented  with  primary  readings  that  address  some  of  the  major philosophical controversies about science; and introductory science courses, especially methods courses, when supplemented with material speci  c to the particular scienti  c fi fi fi eld of study.

This textbook was designed to be usable in its entirety in a standard semester, with approximately one chapter covered per week. But, to be useful in a wide range of course levels and disciplines and for different teaching goals, we have also designed the book to be modular: each chapter can be used independently from the others. Instructors (or independent readers) can thus choose to use only the chapters that suit their needs. Each section may rely on earlier sections in the same chapter, but not later sections in the same chapter or other chapters. Instructors may choose not to assign later sections in some chapters that seem overly specialized or too dif  cult for their teaching needs. fi

## ox 0.1 Citation and using sources B

cientifi  c integrity requires the proper acknowledgement of the sources of ideas S or words researchers use from someone else. There are standard citation practices for ideas and words from published material such as articles, books, and encyclopedia entries. But even using a tool like a large language model (LLM) for  generating  and  editing  text  should  be  transparently  acknowledged  in  a paper.  When  you  directly  use  others'  words,  that  should  be  indicated  with quotation marks and precise citation, including page number where available. A similar point applies to paraphrases. In this textbook, we have compiled our sources for each chapter in a bibliography at the back of the book. Failing to cite one's sources in academic writing or using parts of a text written by someone else  or  the  ideas  of  others-whether  intentional  or  not-is  plagiarism.  But scientifi  c integrity not only requires proper acknowledgement of sources; it also requires relying on the best available sources. Sources must be credible, up-todate, and pertinent. There's no general standard for where to fi  nd high-quality sources. Depending on the purpose of a piece of writing, peer-reviewed academic research articles and books may be the only acceptable sources, while, in other instances, popular content from newspapers and magazines might also be fi  ne. Internet sources might be okay too, but because anyone can publish a blog or pontifi  cate  on  social  media,  it's  essential  to  carefully  evaluate  the  credibility, reputation,  and  timeliness  of  a  source  on  the  internet  and  whether  it  comes from a genuine expert on the topic. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Each section within every chapter ends with a list of exercises to solidify understanding  and  challenge  students  to  apply  what  they  have  learned.  We  encourage instructors to make use of these exercises for in-class group or individual activities, homework,  or  exam  questions.  Exercises  are  divided  into  three  categories: Recall exercises can be completed just by consulting the section. Think exercises provide opportunities to consider implications of or questions about ideas from the section. In Apply exercises, students are asked to apply ideas from the section to new examples or circumstances.

A list of further readings at the end of each chapter provides inroads into more in-depth investigations  of  individual  topics  covered. At  the  end  of  the  book,  there is  a  glossary  of  technical  terms  and  other  specialized  vocabulary  that  students  can consult as needed. Terms de  ned in the glossary are indicated in the main text with fi bold and italics when they are   rst de  ned, as fi fi philosophy of science was earlier in this introduction.

inally, there is a website to accompany the textbook. The website includes example F syllabi for different kinds of courses utilizing this text, additional exercises, an answer key for some exercises, some image   les related to the text, and links to content that fi will enrich students' experience with the topics covered in this book. The website also includes a series of brief videos, each engaging with one of the core topics in this book.

<!-- image -->

## EXERCISES

<!-- image -->

- 0.1  Recall: List three ways in which science is relevant to your life (and others' lives).  Watch Video 1
- 0.2  Think: What do you expect to learn from this textbook and the course you're reading it for? Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution
- 0.3  Think: What most concerns you about this textbook and the course you're reading it for?
- 0.4  Think: What do you think is most valuable about learning about science and scientific reasoning? Give reasons to support your response.
- 0.5  Apply: Describe your relationship to science. For example, have you taken many courses in science or read about science on your own? If so, on what topics, and did you enjoy the experience? Do you know any scientists? Do you think there are reasons to distrust or dislike science? If so, what are the reasons?

## URTHER READINGS F

or  an  overview  of  immunization  and  vaccination,  see World  Health  Organization. F

Vaccines  and  immunization .www.who.int/health-topics/vaccines-and-immunization or a concise overview of how vaccination has contributed to global health, see GreenF wood, B. (2014). The contribution of vaccination to global health: Past, present and future. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B , 369 1645), 20130433. (

- A general reference on topics in philosophy, including philosophy of science, is the Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy . https://plato.stanford.edu

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## 1.1 CIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE OF CLIMATE CHANGE S

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- · Explain why climate change is a serious practical concern
- · Describe  how  scienti fi c  research  supports  the fi nding  of  human-caused  climate change and why public opinion lags behind the research
- · List three indicators that scienti fi c knowledge is trustworthy

## A serious practical concern

In November 2023, the 28th United Nations Climate Change conference was held in the United Arab Emirates. This event was the 28th Conference of the Parties (COP28) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). COP28 was also the 18th meeting of the parties to the Kyoto Protocol, which in 1997 extended and expanded the nations supporting the UNFCCC, and the fifth meeting of the parties to the Paris Agreement, signed by 196 countries in 2015. As this book was printed, COP29 was in planning for November 2024, and annual international meetings in this series are intended to continue.

International conferences about the challenge of climate change have been occurring for 30 years, with increasing consensus about the measures needed to counteract rising global temperatures. A primary goal is to limit the rise in global mean temperature-the average of all land and ocean surface temperatures-to 1.5° Celsius or below compared to preindustrial levels. This temperature change would be minor if it were a single-day temperature in one place. But a 1.5° Celsius increase in global mean temperature is a major change with radical consequences.

Think of this temperature increase like a fever.  The human body maintains a relatively constant temperature in the range of 36.5°-37.5° Celsius (97.7°-99.5° Fahrenheit). When your body temperature increases 1.5° Celsius, which is nearly 3° Fahrenheit, you have a fever. If your body were suddenly that much warmer on average, day in and day out for months and years, it would be a serious medical emergency.

An average global temperature increase of 1.5° Celsius would be similarly devastating for Earth. But why? First, because it changes the Earth's climate. As a result of

climate change, mountain glaciers are shrinking, and ice sheets are melting in the Arctic, Greenland, and Antarctica. These changes lead to sea levels rising, thereby   ooding fl coastal areas. Precipitation patterns across seasons also become more unstable, leading to more droughts, heat waves,   ooding from storms, and wild  res-even shifting the fl fi growth timing of plants and crops that makes them more vulnerable to loss. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis

Second,  the  changing  climate  has  downstream  effects. These  effects  threaten  to push some animal and plant species to extinction, and even collapse ecosystems. Also threatened are human social conditions. Drinking water is scarcer and droughts more frequent  or  severe;  crop  yields  are  expected  to  decrease.  Coastal  cities  and  island nations are at risk of serious   oods and devastating hurricanes. All of this affects global fl health, poverty, hunger, and national security. The World Bank estimates that 200 million people will be forced to migrate between 2020 and 2050 due to the impacts of climate  change.  Ultimately,  global  warming  will  make  the  Earth  less  hospitable  for all creatures, including humans, and a more unjust place in virtue of who will suffer and how this suffering will be managed. International climate change work therefore includes not just efforts to mitigate climate change but also, increasingly, attention to how to adapt human societies to a changed climate. Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Greenhouse gases work like a blanket. As incoming radiation from the Sun permeates our atmosphere, some hits the Earth and is re  ected back out to space. But greenfl house gases, such as methane (CH   ), carbon dioxide (CO   ), and water vapor, trap some 4 2 of the heat in the atmosphere. This trapped heat warms the planet's surface, making it hospitable to life. Higher concentrations of greenhouse gases lead to a warmer planet; lower concentrations lead to a cooler planet.

Changing  atmospheric  concentrations  of  greenhouse  gases  are  a  major  factor  in Earth's  climate.  Other  factors  include  variations  in  the  Earth's  orbit,  the  motion  of tectonic plates, the impact of meteorites, and volcanism on the Earth's surface. So, our climate has never been static: it has been   uctuating for billions of years. What's special fl about the current climate changes, then? Why is this time different?

What's different is that human activities have led to extreme changes. Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, human activities that burn fossil fuels like coal and oil have resulted in carbon dioxide being released into the atmosphere at unprecedented rates. Since carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, this increases the heat retention of  our  atmosphere. Other human activities-primarily agricultural activities such as raising livestock-release methane, which is another greenhouse gas even more potent than carbon dioxide in trapping heat. These human-caused greenhouse gas emissions are so extreme that they've led to a historically unprecedented increase in the Earth's global mean temperature.

This discovery isn't recent. Scientists have known since the 18th century that burning carbon-based fossil fuels releases carbon into the atmosphere. Systematic research on the relationship between carbon dioxide emissions and climate change began in the 19th century, when the American engineer Marsden Manson discovered how the heat-trapping power of the atmosphere varies with only slight changes in its makeup. A few years later, the Swedish physicist and chemist Svante August Arrhenius completed calculations showing that changes in carbon dioxide also function as a 'throttle'

IGURE 1.1 F Swedish chemist and physicist Arrhenius in his lab in 1905

<!-- image -->

on other greenhouse gases like water vapor. He calculated that there would be an arctic temperature increase of approximately 8° C (46.4° F) from atmospheric carbon levels two to three times their known value at the time. In 1908, Arrhenius predicted, 'the slight percentage of carbonic acid in the atmosphere may, by the advances of industry, be changed to a noticeable degree in the course of a few centuries.'

ust before the outbreak of World War II, the British steam engineer Guy Callendar J presented a paper to the Royal Meteorological Society, in which he pointed out that the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide had signi  cantly increased between fi 1900 and 1935, based on temperature measurements at 200 meteorological stations. In 1939, Callendar concluded:

As man is now changing the composition of the atmosphere at a rate which must be very exceptional on the geological time scale, it is natural to seek for the probable effects of such a change. From the best laboratory observations it appears that the principal result of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide . . . would be a gradual increase in the mean temperature of the colder regions of the earth.

This prescient recognition of the role of human activity on atmospheric temperatures had to wait several decades to become widely accepted.

n 1958, the geochemist Charles David Keeling installed four infrared gas analyzers I at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawai'i. Measurement collection has occurred continuously since 1958, recording an ever-increasing atmospheric CO  concentration. The 2 graph showing these measurements is known as the Keeling Curve (see   Figure 1.2  a). Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Keeling's  measurements  provided  evidence  of  rapidly  increasing  carbon  dioxide levels  in  the  atmosphere,  and  a  1979  report  by  the  National  Research  Council-an American nonpro  t organization devoted to scienti  c research-connected this increase fi fi to rise in average temperature. This report predicted that doubling atmospheric CO 2 concentration from 300 to 600 ppm would result in an average warming of 2.0°-3.5° C. ( Parts per million refers to a unit for measuring small concentrations of a substance.) We haven't yet reached the ominous level of 600 ppm, but we're now long past safe levels of CO  in the atmosphere, estimated to be about 350 ppm. 2

IGURE 1.2 F (a) The Keeling Curve (top); (b) Estimated atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide since 1700 (bottom)

<!-- image -->

IGURE  1.3 F Unprecedented  increases  in  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  after  the  Industrial Revolution

<!-- image -->

or  several  decades,  climate  scientists  have  tracked  changing  atmospheric  carbon F dioxide levels with increasing precision. Ice cores taken from various locations in the Antarctic have enabled scientists to extrapolate historic CO  levels for comparison to 2 recent levels (see   Figure 1.2(b)  ). A group of 78 scientists gathered data from several 'climate proxies,' including tree rings, pollen, corals, glacier ice, lake and marine sediments, and historical documents. These data provided multiple types of evidence supporting the conclusion that, at the end of the 20th century, atmospheric levels of CO 2 and global mean temperature are higher than at any point in the previous 2,000 years.

or the past 800,000 years, atmospheric carbon dioxide hadn't been over 300 ppm F (see Figure 1.3). Since the Industrial Revolution began about 250 years ago, the concentration has spiked to 420 ppm. This is nearly 50% more than levels had reached in 800 millennia-reached in only a quarter of one millennium of human-caused change. (See   www.co2.earth for an updated estimate; unfortunately, this number is still climbing  steadily.) The  last  time  CO   levels  were  this  high,  humans  did  not  yet  exist.  In 2 2022, global mean temperature was 1.06° C (1.90° F) warmer than the pre-industrial period (1880-1900) and has been going up 0.18° C each decade. At this rate, 1.5° C will be surpassed before 2040.

## rustworthy scientific knowledge T

Centuries  of  scientific  research-including  convergence  of  many  types  of  evidence and broad consensus among scientists with relevant expertise-support the conclusion that  we  face  an  unprecedented  climate  crisis  caused  by  human  activity,  sometimes called anthropogenic climate change Like other scientific knowledge, it wasn't initially . obvious and still might not be obvious to those without relevant expertise. Scientists had to try out various techniques and gather different kinds of data to discover this conclusion is true.

undamentally, F science aims to produce knowledge-in  particular, scienti  c fi nowledge k explanatory knowledge of why or how the world is the way it is. And it's : the best approach we humans have developed for answering questions about the world

around-and within-us. As we will see throughout the book, the scienti  c establishfi ment has developed countless techniques to acquire knowledge. (You've already read about  some  of  these  at  work  in  the  climate  science  just  described.)  Understanding how scientists acquire new knowledge can give people greater reason to trust scienti  c fi knowledge, even if they themselves don't have a full understanding of the evidence, methods, and reasoning leading to it. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution irst, relevant expertise is important for scienti  c knowledge to be trustworthy. You F fi should trust climate scientists to do climate science in the same way you trust your mechanic  with  your  car  or  your  favorite  restaurant  with  your  dinner.  The  types  of expertise  required  for  these  positions  takes  years,  even  decades,  to  develop.  But  the expertise doesn't neatly transfer from one domain to another: don't trust the average climate scientist to   x your car or make you a delicious meal. Similarly, politicians and fi policymakers know things about political and legislative matters, but they should not be looked to as authorities on the science of climate change-regardless of whether they accept its existence. To do so would be an appeal to irrelevant authority appealing to : the views of an individual who has no expertise in a   eld as evidence for some claim. fi

Second,  consensus  among  the  relevant  experts  is  an  important  indicator  that  the fi ndings  are  settled  scienti  c  knowledge. There  is  striking  agreement  among  climate fi scientists  about  the  existence  of  anthropogenic  climate  change.  Reputable  scientists and scienti  c societies, including the national science academies of the world and the fi Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC),  agree  that  human-caused,  or anthropogenic, climate change is occurring. This includes virtually all climatologists. In 2004, the historian of science Naomi Oreskes analyzed 928 abstracts on climate change published in scienti  c journals from 1993 to 2003; none expressed disagreement with fi the consensus position that anthropogenic climate change is occurring. In 2010, a group of researchers studied the views of the 200 climate scientists with the most extensive and productive publication records; more than 97% af  rmed the existence of anthrofi pogenic climate change as described by the IPCC.

Third,  the  convergence  of  different  sources  and  types  of  evidence  provides  solid grounding for scienti  c knowledge. Well-established theories in physics explain how fi heat radiation works. Physical chemistry shows how carbon dioxide and other greenhouse  gases  in  the  atmosphere  traps  heat.  Climatologists  have  developed  extensive sources of evidence that support the same conclusions about climate change and its relationship to greenhouse gases and human activities. As we described earlier, some of this knowledge goes back centuries, and a range of techniques have been used to amass ever-more relevant evidence. Since the 1950s, scienti  c models and computer fi simulations  have  helped  scientists  to  make  testable  predictions  about  what  would happen to the global climate in response to different changes in human activities, and evidence has con  rmed those predictions. fi

And yet, despite decisive scienti  c evidence supporting a consensus among scienfi tists, public concern for climate change lags behind the research. According to surveys from the Pew Research Center from 2013, 44% surveyed across 23 countries did not view climate change to be a major threat; by 2018, that number had dropped to 33% across the same countries. Whether people are concerned about climate change largely

IGURE 1.4 F Today's decisions determine the extent of climate change by 2100

<!-- image -->

depends on understanding its human causes and level of education. In some countries like the United States, however, being better educated doesn't predict climate change concern as well as political views do.

eople  who don't know much about a given topic can experience an P illusion  of understanding in  which  they  lack  genuine  understanding  and  so  fail  to  appreciate , the  depth  of  their  ignorance  about  that  topic.  For  climate  change,  this  means  that people  without  advanced  education  in  science-a  demographic  that  includes  most politicians-tend to have unwarranted con  dence in their ability to assess the scienfi ti  c fi fi ndings. This includes those who are concerned about climate change as well as those  who deny its existence. Worse, illusions  of  understanding  have  become  easier to  sustain  in  today's  society.  Finding  information  merely  through  internet  searches (so-called Google-knowing has diminished genuine understanding, and we have limited ) opportunities for truly public discourse. Our online and in-person conversations tend to happen with people who have beliefs similar to our own.

mproving  public  climate  literacy  can  support  public  engagement  about  global I warming. If one knows that Earth is warming up and genuinely understands why, this can lead to changed behavior-for instance, petitioning one's government to support more energy-ef  cient practices. More generally, understanding the processes that supfi port trustworthy scienti  c knowledge-including relevant expertise, broad consensus, fi and extensive convergent evidence-is vitally important to assessing whether something quali  es as legitimate scienti  c knowledge and how to go about   nding out. fi fi fi

## XERCISES E

- 1.1  Recall: How do scientists know that human activities are radically altering Earth's climate? Why are these changes a serious concern?
- 1.2  Think: Do all scientists, in virtue of being scientists, have the expertise to make pronouncements about global warming? Or only just those scientists who specialize in the climate sciences? Give reasons to support your answer.

- 1.3  Think: Describe how a nonspecialist can know whether to trust someone claiming scientific expertise, listing at least three kinds of evidence of their expertise.
- 1.4  Recall: Identify three indicators that scientific knowledge is trustworthy described in this section. For each, briefly say why it is important.
- 1.5  Apply: Think  of  a  scientific  finding  that  strikes  you  as  surprising  or  possibly wrong. Do a little internet research (trying to focus on reputable sources). Assess how that scientific finding fares according to the three indicators that scientific knowledge is trustworthy.  Based  on  this,  do  you  think  the  finding  qualifies  as settled knowledge at this stage? Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution
- 1.6  Think: List  three  reasons  why  public  concern  about  anthropogenic  climate change lags behind scientific research. Given that lag, how should climate scientists affect environmental policy in the government? Should they merely collect evidence and produce knowledge, leaving policy decisions to public officials? Do they have any obligations to more actively engage with the public?

## .2 1 UBJECT MATTER AND METHODS S

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- · Describe  what  it  means  for  science  to  provide  natural  explanations  of  natural phenomena
- · De  ne fi empirical  investigation and evidentialism and  state  their  importance  for science
- · ndicate  the  differences  between  falsi  cationism,  falsi  ability,  and  openness  to I fi fi falsi  cation, and state which are essential to the nature of science fi

## he subject matter of science T

We just described some of the abundant scientific evidence for anthropogenic climate change that has amassed over centuries. But we also noted how other experts, including political leaders, have roles to play in public conversations and policy decisions bearing on climate change mitigation and adaptation. What, if anything, is the difference between these forms of expertise?

This question relates to the nature of science that is,  the orientation, values, and , methods that are speci  c to science and allow it to generate knowledge in the ways that fi it does. To begin, notice that things are more complicated than just saying science is in the business of generating knowledge. Scienti  c projects can be directed at a wide range fi of goals. Some scienti  c research aims at knowledge for its own sake; this is sometimes fi called basic research For example, scientists investigate the conditions under which . rainbows form to learn more about the behavior of light. Such knowledge may have applications, but basic research is not primarily focused on identifying or developing applications. Instead, basic research often aims for explanatory knowledge suf  ciently : fi

justi  ed truths about how things work and why they are the way they are. We know fi so much about our world, such as how greenhouse gases in  uence the Earth's climate, fl how rainbows form, and how unemployment relates to in  ation, because of discoveries fl and theories generated from basic research.

Yet,  science  also  plays  an  important  role  in  satisfying  practical  goals.  Many  lifechanging  innovations  have  come  about  through  computer  science.  The  biological and  pharmaceutical  sciences  have  vastly  improved  medical  care  and  public  health. Skyscrapers and airplanes wouldn't be possible without a lot of physics. The contrast with basic research is applied research Scienti  c research is applied when it makes use . fi of scienti  c knowledge to develop some tangible output, such as techniques, software, fi drugs, and new materials. Often, a core motivation for applied research is generating products for pro  t; successful research can result in patentable intellectual property. fi Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Basic and applied scienti  c research can operate synergistically. Scientists aiming at fi the production of knowledge for its own sake often rely on materials and techniques created  by  scientists  doing  applied  research,  while  scientists  doing  applied  research often exploit pure scienti  c knowledge in order to develop new products. Still, basic fi and  applied  research  are  often  carried  out  by  different  scientists,  often  using  very different  techniques,  and  sometimes  in  entirely  different fi elds  of  science  and  types of institutions. For example, when Kathleen Montagu and Arvid Carlsson discovered the neurotransmitter dopamine in the human brain in 1957, this was basic research conducted in a hospital laboratory. In contrast, scientists employed by pharmaceutical companies to develop and improve dopamine-related treatments for Parkinson's disease are doing applied research.

Beyond this distinction between basic and applied research, there is also tremendous variety  in  topics  among  the  various fi elds  of  science.  Investigations  range  from  subatomic particles like quarks, to DNA, to emotions, consciousness, and mental maladies, to languages, societies, and economic phenomena, and much else besides. It can seem as if there is a science of absolutely everything! Professional sports are a good example; some scientists devote their research to learning how to improve athletic performance. Other  topics  of  scienti  c  research  are  more  abstract.  String  theory,  for  example,  is fi highly theoretical physics that posits one-dimensional entities called strings as the basic building block of our universe.

Despite this variety, it's possible to give a unifying description of the sort of explanatory  knowledge  sought  in  science:  science  provides  natural  explanations  of  natural phenomena. This thesis is sometimes called naturalism .

Natural phenomena are objects, events, or processes that are suf  ciently uniform fi to be susceptible to systematic study. Disease epidemics, lunar eclipses, and droughts are all natural phenomena. In  ation, poverty, and unemployment are all phenomena fl in human societies, but they also count as natural phenomena under this de  nition. fi The word phenomenon (plural phenomena comes from Greek and means 'that which ) appears or is seen.' So, phenomena include all observable occurrences, that is, occurrences  detectable  with  the  use  of  our  senses,  including  the  use  of  our  senses  aided by technological devices like telescopes that extend their reach. Natural phenomena need to be somewhat uniform to enable systematic study. Occurring in a regular way

is  needed for scientists' observations across different times and places to be used to generate knowledge.

Natural explanations of natural phenomena invoke features of the world-that is, other natural phenomena-to account for these observable occurrences. If there's an epidemic in France or increased employment in Colombia, you might wonder how that came to be. A natural explanation of the epidemic might specify a contagion and a mechanism of transmission, for example, while a natural explanation for the increase in employment might specify private investments in industry and legislative choices made by political parties. These are both natural explanations of natural phenomena. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Science is always naturalistic in what it investigates and how it explains. The meaning of the term natural in the context of the naturalism of science can be better understood by contrasting it with supernatural Supernatural entities and occurrences may not be . governed by discernible regularities, may not be observable at all or not observable by other people, or are just supposed to transcend the range of physical human experience. Because supernatural entities or occurrences are not natural phenomena, science won't be able to deliver knowledge about them: they would be beyond its explanatory reach. Nor does science appeal to supernatural entities or occurrences to explain natural phenomena. 'A miracle caused her to recover from disease' couldn't possibly be a scienti  c explanation, even though recovering from a disease is a natural phenomenon. fi

## he methods of science T

Science's  goal  of  providing  natural  explanations  of  natural  phenomena  isn't  all  that is distinctive about the nature of science. Also significant are science's methods. One important ingredient of these methods is closely related to the idea of naturalism: science involves empirical investigation which means using one's senses to inform one's , beliefs about the world. What scientists see, hear, smell, touch, and so forth can all be used as empirical evidence for or against some attempted natural explanation.

The method of empirical investigation isn't special to science. We all use our senses in everyday life to learn about the world around us, beginning as infants. You know it's a clear day because you can see and feel the sun shining through the window. But science has   ne-tuned and adapted this method to generate certain kinds of knowledge. fi n science, empirical investigation is explicitly used to generate I evidence Science . is thus based on evidentialism the thesis that a belief's justi  cation is determined by , fi how well it is supported by evidence. For any scienti  c claim-particularly, any natural fi explanation of a natural phenomenon-it must be possible to state why that claim should be believed. This evidence ultimately traces back to empirical observations, but empirical evidence often con  rms scienti  c claims only indirectly. We don't directly see fi fi human activity increasing atmospheric CO   , for example; rather, scientists made pre2 dictions about changes to the atmosphere, historical trends in global temperature, and more, based on this conjecture; and then they tested those predictions with empirical evidence. So, evidentialism is important to science, but how evidence is gathered and used is not always straightforward.

## ox 1.1 Is science always empirical? B

cientists typically use empirical evidence as the basis for knowledge. However, S in fi  elds  like  mathematics, computer science, and economics, some claims are not  based  on  empirical  evidence,  or  at  least  not  directly.  The  mathematical claim that Log  (1/2) = 2 -1 is not an empirical claim, in the sense that it's not based  on  observation.  Something  similar-perhaps  surprisingly-applies  to physics too, where it can be very hard to obtain empirical evidence that bears on some phenomena. String theory, for example, is the idea that the fundamental objects  in  the  world  are  extended,  one-dimensional  objects  called strings . Empirical  evidence  of  these  strings  cannot  be  provided  by  present-day  instruments, but string theory has been developed to account for features of fundamental physics that are well confi  rmed empirically, and string theorists work to fi   nd  nonempirical  evidence  that  bear  on  this  theory.  Sources  of  nonempirical evidence include the simplicity and unifying and explanatory power of a theory, plus the logical relationships between the theory and other claims well confi  rmed by  the  empirical  evidence  or  believed  to  be  self-evidently  true.  Nonempirical evidence in favor of string theory includes that it can account for well-corroborated claims in fundamental physics, that it has been productively applied to a range of scientifi  c problems like black holes and nuclear physics, and that it fi   ts  with  both quantum mechanics and Einstein's theories of gravity. So, not all evidence  is  empirical  evidence,  and  not  all  scientifi  c  research  is  based  on empirical evidence. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Evidentialism  in  science  leads  to  continual,  self-corrective  investigation  in  which ideas are   ne-tuned or extended in light of new evidence. Signi  cant empirical evidence fi fi is  needed before some scienti  c claim, like the claim that human activity is causing fi global warming, is broadly accepted as settled scienti  c knowledge. There are many fi scienti  c   ndings that are so well supported by evidence that they seem entirely certain. fi fi We know atmospheric CO  is more than 50% higher now than at any other time in 2 human history, and we know that the last four decades are the warmest on record. We know anthropogenic climate change is occurring. We also know that the Earth orbits around the Sun, that water molecules are composed of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, and so much more. Still, in principle, scienti  c claims are never taken to fi be absolutely beyond any doubt. And very occasionally, continuing investigation even leads widely held or long-established ideas to be signi  cantly revised. fi

Karl Popper was a philosopher of science in the early 20th century who took this inprinciple revisability of science to be especially important. Popper developed a principle called falsi  cationism fi which  names the thesis that scienti  c reasoning proceeds by , fi attempting to disprove claims rather than to prove them right-that is, by advancing bold and risky conjectures, and then trying to falsify or refute them. This criterion for science has been very in  uential among scientists, but it is controversial. One problem fl

is  that  the  relationship  between  empirical  evidence  and  a  scienti  c  theory  can  be fi complicated, so that it is sometimes hard to say when the evidence would disprove a theory. A second problem is that incessantly trying to prove central claims false would limit  scienti  c  progress.  It  seems  scientists  do  accept  theories  and  hypotheses  that fi are well supported by evidence, moving on to downstream questions based on those theories and hypotheses. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Two other aspects of falsi  cationism do seem more plausible. First, any scienti  c fi fi claim should in principle be falsi  able fi A claim is falsi  able when it is possible to describe . fi what  kind  of  evidence  would,  if  found,  show  the  claim  to  be  false. This  property  is required for scienti  c claims to be subject to empirical evidence; without it, a claim fi would  be  unscienti  c.  Notice  that  true  claims  can  be  falsi  able-you  can  describe fi fi what kind of evidence would, if found, disprove a true claim. It's just that, because the claim is true, you will never actually   nd such evidence. Even for false claims, scientists fi may never be in the right circumstances to obtain falsifying evidence. Putting forward falsi  able claims enables science to be based on empirical evidence and to reject ideas fi when the evidence warrants doing so.

Second,  science  requires  honesty  when  empirical  evidence  does  indicate  a  claim is false. When scientists discover apparently falsifying evidence, they should begin to doubt the ideas under investigation. In general, we humans try hard to hold on to our existing beliefs, even when those beliefs are challenged. Scientists are no different. But science's evidentialism requires scientists to doubt any scienti  c claims-even claims fi they had thought were really promising-when empirical evidence suggests they may be wrong. We might call this openness to falsi  cation fi any claim should be abandoned : when the preponderance of evidence indicates that it's false.

IGURE 1.5 F Schematic flowchart of Popper's falsificationism compared to falsifiable claims and openness to falsification

<!-- image -->

## XERCISES E

- 1.7 Recall: Define natural phenomena and natural  explanations ,  and describe the importance of each to science's ability to generate trustworthy knowledge. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis
- 1.8 Apply: Describe one real example of basic research and one real example of applied research. For each, describe your reasoning in considering it basic or applied research. Review Copy - Not for Redistribution
- 1.9 Recall: Describe  what  it  means  for  science  to  provide  natural  explanations  of natural phenomena. What are the limitations to the kinds of knowledge science can produce due to this requirement?
- 1.10  Recall: Define empirical investigation and evidentialism Describe how they are . different from each other and how each is important to science.
- 1.11  Think: Evaluate how and why the subject matter and methods of science are each relevant to the nature of science.
- 1.12  Recall: Define falsificationism , falsifiability and , openness to falsification ,  making sure you are clear about how each is different from the others. For each, say whether it is essential to science and why.

## .3 1 HE INSTITUTION OF SCIENCE T

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- · De  ne fi con  rmation bias fi and give examples of how it works
- · Describe how social structure is important to the nature of science
- · Describe how social norms for individual scientists and the scienti  c community fi are important to the trustworthiness of science

## laws in human reasoning F

Empirical  investigation  is  a  basic  aspect  of  human  existence  and  so  not  special  to science. Why, then, is science needed to give us knowledge about the world, beyond just our ordinary human powers of observation? Just as we humans are predisposed to investigate our world using our senses from our first days of infancy, we are also predisposed  to  some  serious  flaws  in  how  we  gather  evidence  and  how  we  reason. Science is the best route to knowledge about the world in part because it incorporates ways to protect against those flaws in reasoning.

t is normal for people to favor some ideas over others. We can then use our experiI ences in the world, investigation of existing knowledge, and critical thinking to ensure that the ideas we favor are, in fact, good ideas. The problem is, we also seek out and interpret information in ways that   t with our favored ideas, and we avoid information fi that challenges those ideas. This is a well-established feature of human reasoning called

con  rmation bias fi the tendency to look for, interpret, and recall evidence in ways that : con  rm and do not challenge our existing beliefs. fi magine someone has just brought her friends to a restaurant she's selected. When I she asks her friends if they like the restaurant, she may say, 'It's good, isn't it?' Framing the question in this way promotes agreement with the judgment she already has of the  restaurant-it's  a  way  of  looking  for  con  rming  evidence.  Similarly,  someone fi who's skeptical about climate change may perform an internet search for the phrase evidence  against  climate  change to  learn  more,  or  they  may  focus  on  what  critics say  and  ignore  what  climate  scientists  say.  Someone  concerned  about  genetically modi  ed crops is more likely to make time to read an article entitled 'Dangers of fi Genetic Modi  cation' than an article titled 'Genetic Modi  cation Boosts Soy and fi fi Corn Performance.' These are ways of seeking evidence that con  rms one's existing fi ideas rather than challenging those ideas. We are also prone to interpreting evidence as  supporting  our  existing  ideas.  In  one  study,  people  who  were  in  favor  of  and opposed to the death penalty both read the same discussion of the death penalty. People on each side of the issue interpreted the discussion entirely differently; each side thought it supported their own view. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Con  rmation bias can involve looking only for evidence that supports your existing fi beliefs, cherry-picking which research to believe and which to ignore, holding evidence against your views to a higher standard than evidence in favor of your views, and more easily remembering supporting evidence than contrary evidence.

We all do this; it doesn't matter what views about the world we have, what political views we have, whether we've graduated from college, or whether we have been trained  as  scientists.  In  fact,  some  evidence  suggests  that  con  rmation  bias  worsens fi with increased education. Although everyone is prone to con  rmation bias, the effect fi tends to be stronger for politically or emotionally charged issues, such as vaccinations, climate change, and health.

Scientists' expectations or desires about the results of scienti  c research can lead fi to  incorrect fi ndings.  One  way  in  which  this  can  happen  is  through  the observerexpectancy effect when a scientist's expectations lead them (perhaps, unconsciously) , to in  uence the behavior of experimental subjects. A famous example of this involved fl Clever Hans, a horse who was thought to have sophisticated abilities including performing arithmetic calculations. Hans's owner, Wilhelm von Osten, was a mathematics teacher, horse trainer, and phrenologist. (Phrenology is the now-discredited study of the shape of the skull as an indicator of personality and mental abilities.) Hans was trained to recognize numerals from 1 to 9 and to tap his hooves to indicate which ones he recognized. Eventually, van Osten had Hans tapping out correct answers to questions like: what's the number of 4s in 16?

n 1891, van Osten traveled around Germany to exhibit his amazing horse. There I was such fanfare that the famous psychologist Carl Stumpf appointed a special commission to provide critical scrutiny. In 1904, the commission concluded that Hans's abilities were legitimate. The horse was able to answer questions from simple arithmetic to square roots, fractions and decimals, units of time, musical scales, and the value of coins. Hans could even respond accurately when van Osten wasn't present.

IGURE 1.6 F Clever Hans and Wilhelm von Osten

<!-- image -->

The  commission  was  wrong.  Stumpf's  pupil,  Oskar  Pfungst,  demonstrated  that Clever Hans was not performing sophisticated mental calculations. Pfungst used blinders to vary whether Hans could see the questioner, and he varied who played the role of questioner. Hans produced the correct answer even when van Osten himself did not ask the questions, but Hans's performance fell apart when the questioner did not know the answer or when the horse was asked the question from behind a screen. When the visibility of spectators and questioners was masked, Hans's ability to produce correct answers fell dramatically from 89% to 6%. Further observations con  rmed that Hans fi was being unwittingly cued by his human audience. Questioners' body language and facial expressions became taut as his tapping approached the correct answer, and then more relaxed upon the   nal tap; this change prompted Hans to stop tapping. fi

## cience as a social enterprise S

Like  van  Osten  and  all  the  other  people  who  asked  questions  of  Clever  Hans,  our expectations  can  affect  how  matters  play  out,  even  when  we  don't  intend  this  to happen. This possibility makes it hard for people-including scientists-to reason their way to the right answers.  For  this  reason,  one  element  of  science's  great  success  in generating knowledge about our world is its institutional features that protect against or counteract the basic flaws in human reasoning.

Scienti  c research requires communities of many people working together. Teams of fi scientists work together on research projects; it is common for research publications to have multiple authors. Scientists also regularly make use of techniques, data, or ideas developed by other scientists. And all new scienti  c research is based in part on the fi fi ndings of previous scientists. Such collaboration is essential to the development and re  nement of scienti  c knowledge: no one scientist can produce scienti  c knowledge fi fi fi on their own. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

We have seen how science is based on empirical investigation. And yet, empirical evidence bearing on scienti  c claims often doesn't come directly from an individual fi scientist's own observations. Instead, an important source of evidence is other scientists' reports of their observations as detailed in research publications. Keeling and his collaborators   rst  measured the increasing concentration of atmospheric CO  depicted fi 2 in the Keeling curve, but many more climate scientists later made use of those data in their own research. Scienti  c collaboration thus greatly ampli  es the reach of empirifi fi cal investigation.

Collaboration and competition among scientists also help detect and correct   aws fl in  human  reasoning,  giving  rise  to  the  self-corrective  process  of  re  ning  scienti  c fi fi knowledge. Collaboration among scientists creates opportunities for people with other viewpoints to analyze the evidence and ideas from their own perspectives and methodologies. While new research projects are based on the   ndings of previous scientists, fi they are also opportunities to re  ne or challenge those earlier   ndings. Competition fi fi among scientists-to make a discovery before anyone else, to get their research projects funded, and to show that an idea is better supported by the evidence than an opposing idea-also spurs reexamination of ideas that other scientists might take for granted. Collaboration and competition in science should combine to increase the trustworthiness of scienti  c knowledge. If a large and diverse group of scientists agree about some fi fi nding, we should be more con  dent that it is legitimate. fi

This raises another point about the importance of science as a social enterprise. To adequately protect against individual   aws in reasoning, scienti  c communities need fl fi to be diverse in order to provide satisfactory interpretations of the available evidence, as well as to formulate and test a variety of ideas, including perspectives from different nationalities, races and ethnicities, gender identities, cultures, and more. This kind of diversity bene  ts science by guarding against any individual biases and personal values. fi

## ocial norms of science S

Because the institutional structure of science is essential to its ability to generate knowledge, science has important social norms-rules or guidelines that scientific activities should adhere to and against which they are evaluated. One set of norms applies to the  behavior  of  scientists.  Scientists  are  obligated  to  have  scientific  integrity,  which involves expectations of honesty and avoiding improper influence by others. Norms of scientific integrity are so important that their violation is severely punished by the scientific community, such as with bans from publishing in scientific journals or even loss of one's job as a scientist.

Examples of scienti  c dishonesty include plagiarism and fabricating data. fi Plagiarism is  the fraudulent theft of someone else's ideas, scienti  c results, or words, which are fi subsequently presented as one's own work without giving proper credit. Fabricating data occurs when, rather than collecting empirical evidence, scientists create records of observations they didn't actually make in order to use them as evidence to support a desired conclusion. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution n 2011, a Dutch social psychologist, Diederik Stapel, published a widely read study I in Science one of the most prestigious scienti  c journals, presenting evidence that trash-, fi fi lled environments lead people to be more racist. But rather than collecting actual data, Stapel just made it up. When this was discovered, his reputation immediately collapsed. All his other publications were scrutinized, and approximately 60 other papers were retracted for data fabrication. Other scientists have also been forced out of science after their ethics violations were discovered, such as the Seoul National stem-cell researcher Hwang Woo-suk and the Harvard evolutionary biologist Marc Hauser. Some science journalists have helped increase awareness of issues like plagiarism and data fabrication by running blogs such as Retraction Watch .

## ox 1.2 Merton's social norms of science B

ocial norms are informal rules that govern behavior in groups and societies. S American sociologist of science Robert Merton specifi  ed four social norms that govern scientists' attitudes and behaviors towards each other and their research, thereby enhancing the moral integrity of scientifi  c communities and supporting the expansion of scientifi  c knowledge.

- 1. Communism scientifi  c fi  ndings and methods are common goods owned by : all and should be shared freely.
- 2. Universalism scientifi  c  work  should  be  evaluated  based  on  impersonal : criteria like coherence with other bodies of knowledge and empirical confirmation. In other words, scientifi  c work should be independent of the sociopolitical or personal status of the scientists involved.
- 3. Disinterestedness scientifi  c work should not be aimed at personal gain. :
- 4. Skepticism scientifi  c work should be scrutinized critically and transparently : by relevant scientifi  c communities before being accepted.

hese four norms relate to how we are discussing collaboration and competition T and social norms of science in this section.

Scientists  also  are  expected  to  avoid con  icts  of  interest fl : fi nancial  or  personal gains that have the potential to inappropriately in  uence scienti  c research, results, fl fi or publication. Con  icts of interest, especially when research is funded by organifl zations with a   nancial stake in the   ndings, can result in researchers intentionally fi fi or unintentionally altering what research they conduct, their   ndings, or what they fi report in publications. Thus, scientists are obligated to disclose any potential con  icts fl of interests they may have. The existence of potential con  icts of interest does not fl necessarily lead to bias, but transparency about them allows others to evaluate the possibility of improper in  uence. fl Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Here's an important example. Clair Patterson, a geochemist at Cal  Tech in California, led the campaign to remove lead from gasoline in the 1960s and 1970s. Leaded gasoline  contained  lead  tetraethyl,  which  is  extremely  toxic  to  human  and  non-human animals alike. Because the campaign against leaded gasoline threatened their pro  ts, fi the fossil fuel industry-particularly the Ethyl Corporation-fought bitterly against Patterson's research. Among their tactics was to pay another scientist, Robert Kehoe, to attest to the safety of leaded gasoline. Eventually, his dishonesty was revealed, and honest science carried the day. Lead was removed from gasoline, but only after generations of people in many countries around the world suffered from elevated lead levels in their blood, which leads to brain damage, chronic illness, birth defects, and increased death rates. Urban areas around the world still have elevated levels of lead in their soil from this period.

Another  important  form  of  protection  against fl aws  in  reasoning  involves  social norms and incentives governing the scienti  c community as a whole. One such norm is fi trust. Scientists' trust in one another is the glue of scienti  c communities. For example, fi collaborative  projects  on  climate  change  involve  scientists  with  a  range  of  different expertise, including climatologists, ecologists, physicists, statisticians, and economists. None of these scientists alone possesses comprehensive expertise to collect, analyze, and interpret the full range of evidence that bears on our understanding of anthropogenic climate change. These scientists must rely on each other and must trust one another's scienti  c work. fi

Scientists also are expected to critically evaluate one another's work by deciding whether results warrant publication, evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of research   ndings, and choosing whether and how to respond to published   ndfi fi ings.  One important form of critical evaluation is attempting to replicate others' research. In replication an experiment or study is performed again (often by dif-, ferent scientists) to determine whether the same   ndings obtain. If successful, the fi replicated results further con  rm the ideas under investigation. If the results are fi not replicated, this raises doubts about the original work, such as the possibility that  something  unexpected  was  instead  responsible  for  the fi nding.  This  is  one way to  think  about  what  happened  with  continued  evaluation  of  Clever  Hans's apparent math skills.

## XERCISES E

- 1.13  Recall: Describe three types of influence of confirmation bias, and define observerexpectancy effect . Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis
- 1.14  Recall: Describe how social structure is important to science, listing at least three ways in which it's important that are discussed in this section. Review Copy - Not for Redistribution
- 1.15  Think: What does it mean to say scientific knowledge is produced by scientific communities instead of individuals? In light of your answer, explain why scientific communities need to be diverse across a range of characteristics.
- 1.16  Recall: Describe how social norms for individual scientists and for the scientific community are both important to the trustworthiness of science.
- 1.17  Recall: Describe three kinds of scientific fraud or scientific misconduct, giving an example of each.
- 1.18  Think: How should trust and criticism be balanced in scientific communities, and why is this important to science? How should trust and skepticism of the public toward scientific findings be balanced, and why is this important for the public's relationship to science?

## .4 1 DEFINING SCIENCE

After reading this section, you should be able to:

- · Describe why it is dif  cult to de  ne science and distinguish it from other pursuits fi fi
- · De  ne fi pseudoscience and give examples
- · Analyze whether a claim or topic of research counts as scienti  c using the checklist fi for science

## seudoscience and the tricky work of defining science P

cience is unrivaled in its ability to generate knowledge about our world. It has earned S authority and legitimacy from centuries of successes and improvements that go beyond the expertise of any individual scientist or investigation. Many people and organizations are eager to lay claim to scientific legitimacy, and it's sometimes difficult to discern whether they are entitled to it.

This is not a new problem. Karl Popper, the 20th-century philosopher encountered in the previous section, argued that some investigations thought to be scienti  c were fi instead pseudoscience which means false, fake, or bogus science. Such nonscienti  c , fi activities are designed to look enough like science to deceive people into thinking they have scienti  c legitimacy. A standard example of pseudoscience is astrology (not to be fi confused with astronomy, which is the scienti  c   eld that studies celestial objects in fi fi space). Astrology is commonly associated with horoscopes, which use zodiac signs to

make predictions about future events, relationships, destiny, and the like. Tests of astrological ideas have generated lots of empirical evidence against them, and advocates of astrology rarely engage in systematic attempts to empirically test their claims-claims that haven't changed much since astrology peaked in popularity centuries ago. And yet, even though astrology is bunk, it is still promoted as a legitimate source of knowledge. Massive numbers of astrologers, clairvoyants, psychics, and other charlatans take in billions of dollars every year for their consultations. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution f  astrology  is  pursued  purely  for  entertainment,  without  pretense  of  generating I knowledge or misleading anyone into thinking it's doing so, then perhaps there's no grounds  for  complaint.  The  central  problem  with  pseudoscience  is  the  deceptive attempt to appear scienti  c and, thus, to have the ability to generate scienti  c knowlfi fi edge when it doesn't.

n  many  cases,  the  speci  c  intent  of  the  advocates  of  pseudoscienti  c  theories I fi fi is  to  appeal  to  science's  self-correcting  nature  to  call  into  doubt  scienti  c fi fi ndings supported  by  enough  evidence  to  be  considered  established  scienti  c  knowledge. fi Anti-vaccination advocacy is like this. One popular anti-vaccination argument is that childhood vaccines increase  the  risk  of  autism.  Extensive  testing  has  demonstrated clearly and conclusively that there is no causal connection between vaccination regimes and the incidence of disorders like autism. This conclusion is scienti  c: it is based on fi evidence, is open to falsi  cation, and would be rejected if suf  cient evidence against fi fi it were found. But existing research is so extensive and compelling that the possibility of newfound discon  rming evidence is virtually nonexistent. Nonetheless, propaganda fi outlets and anti-vaccination groups peddle misinformation, trying to induce doubt by misconstruing the relevant research and with stories of children who were diagnosed with autism after vaccination. (This does regularly happen, for the simple reason that vaccination regimes and many symptoms of autism both tend to emerge in the same stage of early childhood.)

Another  example  of  pseudoscience  is  creationism  and intelligent  design which , are  attempts  to  explain  the  characteristics  of  living  organisms  by  appeal  to  supernatural events, inspired by religious teachings. For close to a century now, 'creation science' and later intelligent design were effectively advocated in the United States as alternative scienti  c theories to evolutionary theory, including publication of glossy fi textbooks and even a creationism-based alternative natural history museum. The basic thought behind both creationism and intelligent design is that living organisms are so complex that they couldn't possibly have come about by evolution. This idea is not supported by evidence; it is actually debunked by the evidence, which, at the same time, clearly indicates the workings and effects of biological evolution. Notice that this does not imply that evolutionary theory has proven that there is no supernatural involvement; that would be beyond the purview of science. Rather, it's just that the natural explanation of evolution successfully accounts for the natural phenomenon of complex lifeforms.

Healthcare is a common target for pseudoscience. Besides anti-vaccination advocacy, another example is conversion therapy, which is intervention intended to change a person's sexual orientation. Conversion therapy pretends to be like psychological therapy

and is still practiced in some circles, but it has been thoroughly shown to be ineffective and psychologically harmful. Other instances of pseudoscience might be less clear-cut. Naturopathy is an approach to healthcare that emphasizes thinking about conditions of  the  whole  body  and  looking  to  natural,  folk,  or  indigenous  remedies  for  health concerns. This  approach  might  have  some  value  when  medical  research  is  focused on precisely targeted medical intervention and when pharmaceutical drugs (but not herbal supplements) are subject to rigorous testing and regulation. Further, naturopathy training programs and licensure exist in some places. Nonetheless, some approaches endorsed in naturopathic medicine have been disproven with evidence. It can be diffi cult to judge whether naturopathy should be dismissed entirely as pseudoscience or might be rendered more legitimately science-based with continued development or integration into mainstream medical practices. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Here's another example of pseudoscience that comes from inside science. Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway's book, Merchants of Doubt which also inspired a   lm , fi of the same name, details how one group of well-respected scientists in the United States provided legal testimony and spurred research that misled the public and enabled  corporations  to  dodge  responsibility  for  the  health  and  environmental catastrophes of cigarettes, acid rain, climate change, and the toxin DDT. Apparently inspired by their political views, these scientists misused the authority of science to delay acceptance of established scienti  c knowledge that was inconvenient for fi powerful corporations.

As these examples reveal, discerning science from pseudoscience can be essential for health and safety, but doing so can be very dif  cult. Where is the line between harmfi less entertainment and pernicious fake knowledge, or between a new, underexplored alternative  idea  and  a  cynical  attempt  to  inspire  doubt  in  well-established  scienti  c fi knowledge? It seems we cannot just rely on whatever individual scientists tell us to believe. And some features of the nature of science described in the previous section might be shared by varieties of pseudoscience.

## A checklist for science

We have discussed many distinctive features of the nature of science. These include aiming to generate knowledge, naturalism, empirical investigation, evidentialism, falsifiability and openness to falsification, and characteristic institutional structures. Some people have advocated one or another of these as the best way to define science, as with Popper's falsificationism. Others have suggested these different features are together the hallmark features of science. We think that is the most promising approach. So, we define science as the inclusive social project of developing natural explanations for natural phenomena. These explanations are tested against empirical evidence and must be subject to open critique, refinement, and rejection.

The characterization of science developed here can provide a kind of checklist for assessing to what extent some activity quali  es as scienti  c, as pictured in   Table 1.1  . fi fi

Consider  how  this  characterization  of  science  relates  to  our  earlier  example  of climate  change.  First,  science  aims  to  generate  knowledge.  Climate  science  aims  to

## ABLE 1.1 T Checklist of hallmark features of science

- ✓ Aims to generate knowledge ( knowledge-oriented )
- ✓ Provides natural explanations of natural phenomena ( naturalism ) Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis
- ✓ Advances claims that can be tested against observational evidence ( empiricism ) Review Copy - Not for Redistribution
- ✓ Updates claims based on available evidence ( evidentialism )
- ✓ Abandons any idea that has been thoroughly refuted ( openness to falsifi  cation )
- ✓ Involves the broader scientifi  c community ( social and institutional structure )

generate knowledge of the extent and ways in which human activities are transforming Earth's climate and of the impacts this transformation will have on weather systems, ecosystems, and human societies. Because science is naturalistic, it is limited to natural explanations of natural phenomena. The warming of the Earth's climate is a natural phenomenon,  subject  to  empirical  investigation.  The  proposed  natural  explanation for this phenomenon is that human activities have generated unprecedented levels of greenhouse gases and the warming effect of those gases.

All scienti  c claims must be testable, or falsi  able, with the use of empirical evidence, fi fi and claims must be supported by signi  cant evidence to be accepted (or discon  rmed fi fi by suf  cient  evidence to be discarded). The claims that the concentration of atmofi spheric greenhouse gases has dramatically increased since the Industrial Revolution and that the last four decades are the warmest on record (for example) are both testable. We can describe the kinds of evidence that would lead us to reject these claims, but scientists have not found that evidence despite extensive investigation. These claims have not been falsi  ed; they are accepted by the scienti  c community only because fi fi there is strong evidence in their favor.

As new evidence becomes available, scienti  c claims are corroborated, revised, corfi rected, or rejected through the collaborative work of researchers embedded in the social and  institutional  structures  of  science.  Climate  change  research  involves  numerous scientists utilizing techniques from different   elds of science, and our understanding of fi climate change and predictions of its effects are constantly   ne-tuned. The basic idea fi of anthropogenic climate change has persisted through all of this-indeed has become more broadly held-because no challenges to the idea or to the research supporting it  have  been successful. Multiple studies published in peer-review scienti  c journals fi independently con  rm that glacier retreat and climate-warming trends over the past fi century are due to human activities, and most of the leading scienti  c organizations fi worldwide endorse this conclusion.

Here's an obvious contrast with science: jazz. Jazz artists do not collect measurements or other similar forms of evidence to test hypotheses about the value of a piece of work, and disagreements about the value of, say, Ella Fitzgerald's Over the Rainbow cannot be settled by running experiments, conducting empirical studies, or developing

<!-- image -->

Watch Video 2

models.  Unlike  scientists,  jazz  musicians  do  not  aim  to fi nd  natural  explanations  of features of the natural world with their practices.

Now consider astrology, a canonical example of pseudoscience introduced previously. The primary claims made in astrology, such as horoscope predictions, are not designed  to  be  falsi  able;  in  fact,  many  are  speci  cally  designed  to  be  unfalsi  able. fi fi fi They  are  vague  in  ways  that  allow  many  different  interpretations,  and  so,  for  any interpretation that is wrong, another can be offered in its place. Further, the systems of horoscopes used by astrologists are inconsistent with well-understood basic theories of biology, physics, and psychology. This violates the expectation of the collaborative exchange of ideas among scientists. Astrology is not science. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Astrology may be a harmless fad, with negative consequences largely con  ned to fi misspent leisure time and money. Other pseudoscienti  c projects are much more danfi gerous. Denials of anthropogenic climate change-despite overwhelming evidencehave contributed to a lack of political will to address the climate crisis, a failure that is beginning to lead to catastrophic consequences. The campaign of denialism described in Merchants of Doubt involved well-established scientists introducing doubt and distraction about topics beyond their scienti  c expertise to in  uence political outcomes. fi fl Their denial of climate change was not designed to be falsi  able: no amount of evifi dence would change their mind. Some climate change deniers have even rejected the idea that science is a trustworthy source of knowledge in order to hold fast to their rejection of climate change.

## ox 1.3 Evaluating scientific expertise B

magine  you  are  asked  to  vote  on  a  policy  about  banning  cannabis.  The I potential ban appeals to research showing that cannabis causes schizophrenia. Suppose  you  do  not  know  much  about  cannabinoids  and  their  psychiatric effects. Where would you search for relevant, trustworthy information? Without expertise  in  the  relevant  science,  it  can  be  diffi  cult  to  evaluate  scientifi  c research. You might fi  nd on social media two alleged experts who disagree about  the  causal  claim.  How  should  you  decide  who  is  the  most  credible? The  most  straightforward  way  to  evaluate  scientifi  c  claims  is  to  assess  the quality  of  the  arguments  presented  by  the  experts.  But  this  can  be  diffi  cult, as  scientifi  c  information  can  be  technical  and  hard  to  understand  for  nonexperts.  For  this  reason,  it  is  also  important  to  consider  the  credentials  and reputation of the alleged experts, including the relevance of their qualifi  cations and their accomplishments in their fi  eld, and look out for any possible sources of  confl  ict  of  interest  or  bias.  And,  because  science  is  a  collaborative  enterprise, try to learn what the consensus or near-consensus is in the relevant area of research. This is more important than what any individual scientist thinks. So, you should also beware the maverick scientist who claims to have refuted the consensus in the fi  eld!

## cience's limitations S

While science is our best route to knowledge about the world around us and to developing innovations based on that knowledge, it is also important to recognize what it doesn't do.

Scientists try to gain knowledge, that is, to develop natural explanations of natural phenomena. The list of the phenomena investigated in science is long; in principle, it includes everything in our universe. But there are some important limitations to the scope  of  science.  Science  doesn't  replace  or  limit  nonscienti  c  intellectual  pursuits, fi like  literature,  music,  and  painting-or  politics  for  that  matter.  Basing  our  scienti  c fi knowledge about climate change on   uctuating political agendas would be a mistake. fl But, when it comes to addressing climate change with policy interventions, debating which steps are politically feasible and desirable is fair game for politicians. Of course, knowledge from climate science and other scienti  c   elds such as economics, sociology, fi fi and psychology should be considered in these deliberations. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution

Scienti  c  knowledge  differs  from  theological  doctrine  and  religious  practice,  too. fi Unlike religious practitioners, scientists attempt to explain things without appeal to supernatural entities or in  uences, such as deities or miracles, or to literary allegories fl or culturally signi  cant myths. Furthermore, faith has a central place in many religions, fi while it should have none in science. Of course, one can be religious in myriad ways, and many people-scientists included-are both religious and believers in scienti  c fi knowledge.  People  disagree  about  the  role  religion  should  play  in  our  society,  but whatever role that might be, science is not designed to occupy it.

Scientism is a derogatory term for an excessive belief in science as a solution to every possible problem-including philosophical problems about the meaning of life and our place in the universe. Like pseudoscience, scientism expresses a kind of intellectual arrogance, where one gives excessive deference to science as the sole source of knowledge we might acquire and the only way to   nd correct answers to any question of human fi concern we might ask. In public debates, symptoms of scientism include generic slogans like 'because science says so' and 'science doesn't care what you believe,' which are ironically designed to halt discussion rather than to promote it. Also included are quick dismissals of other humanistic endeavors and disciplines like history and philosophy as being 'anti-science.' We think it is important to distinguish the thought that science is a uniquely trustworthy source of a certain kind of knowledge from ideas that might sound similar, such as that professional science is the only way to have knowledge of any kind or should be the basis of one's entire worldview.

## XERCISES E

- 1.19 Recall: Define the term pseudoscience and give two examples of pseudoscience discussed in the section. For each, describe why it counts as pseudoscience.
- 1.20 Apply: Choose one example of pseudoscience discussed in this section and evaluate it using the checklist of science. Describe how it is similar to science and how

it is different. Can you identify features of the example you've chosen that seem to be intended to appear more like science than they are?

- 1.21 Think: What's distinctive about science, in comparison to activities like literature, music, and art, as a source of knowledge about the world? Do you think there are any important differences between scientific and artistic ways of gaining knowledge? Support your answers with justification. Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution
- 1.22 Think: Why must science be limited to the study of natural phenomena? Why must it give only natural explanations? Can you think of any scientific projects that don't seem to satisfy these requirements? If so, describe one such project, making clear why you think it might not be naturalistic. If not, describe a nonscientific project that seems to be non-naturalistic and say why.
- 1.23 Apply: Search the internet (news websites, magazines, blogs, etc.) for a story about  a  finding  purporting  to  be  based  on  science,  and  answer  the  following uestions about it. Include a link to your source when submitting your response. q (Alternatively, your instructor may provide you with a story to analyze.)

Answer the following questions about the story:

- . a What is the source? Is the person making the claims someone with genuine expertise in what they're claiming?
- . b Does it seem like there's any conflict of interest? Why or why not?
- . c Does the claim involve vague or ambiguous language?
- . d Do the claims fit with other well-confirmed scientific theories?
- . e What is the evidence cited in support of the claim?
- . f Does this describe good science? Why or why not?
- 1.24 Recall: Define scientism and  describe  why  it  is  a  problem.  Give  an  example of legitimate reasoning leading to knowledge that occurs outside of professional science.

## URTHER READING F

or  more  on  political  in  uence  used  to  cast  doubt  on  climate  change  research  and F fl other scienti  c   ndings, see Oreskes, N., &amp; Conway, E. (2010). fi fi Merchants of doubt . Bloomsbury.

or an accessible online resource about the nature of science and scienti  c processes, F fi see the website Understanding science . https://undsci.berkeley.edu or  more  on  how  social  norms  and  social  structures  in  uence  scienti  c  inquiry,  see F fl fi Merton, R. K. (1942). Science and technology in a democratic order. Journal of Legal and Political Sociology 115-126. Reprinted with the title 'The normative , 1 , structure of science' in Merton, R. K. (1973). The sociology of science: Theoretical and empirical investigations University of Chicago Press. .

Also  see  on  social  norms  and  structures  in  science  Boyer-Kassem, T.,  Mayo-Wilson, C., &amp; Weisberg, M. (Eds.). (2018). Scienti  c collaboration and collective knowledge fi . Oxford University Press.

or more on the demarcation between science and pseudoscience, see Pigliucci, M., &amp; F Boudry, M. (Eds.). (2013). Philosophy of pseudoscience: Reconsidering the demarcation problem University of Chicago Press. . Copyright Material - Provided by Taylor &amp; Francis Review Copy - Not for Redistribution